[Music]
everybody welcome to another episode of
conversations with tom i am here with
somebody who i think is an extraordinary
thinker in the health space and
elsewhere just a really bright dude fun
to be around his name is max lugavir uh
he was on health theory before and now
we're diving into an episode here and
he's got a new book out
which is right there for anybody who's
watching called the genius life um this
was really an interesting read man and
i'm super curious so
obviously there's
a meaningful jumping off point with
where you started before which is on the
diet side the genius foods now branching
into the genius lifestyle was
i know that the journey began with your
mom and what she went through which we
covered in the healthier episodes we
don't have to retread that but um
was that the impetus for pushing deeper
into the topic yeah to be honest i mean
you know what it takes today to live a
healthy
a long and healthy life
it's so multi-faceted uh and nutrition
is definitely it plays a major a major
role in that regard but it's just one
part of the puzzle and so whereas genius
food is my first book i consider to be
sort of the ultimate nutritional care
manual for the human brain
having a brain that functions as well as
it ought to requires a lot more than
just healthy eating today unfortunately
i mean i wish it was as easy as eating
you know a handful of blueberries and
wild salmon and uh you know some nuts
here and there but actually you know the
modern world is sort of like the hunger
games
for for the human brain and i know you
love the movie references and uh we're
just like we're being attacked from
every which way from you know the
the industrial chemicals which we are
confronted with on a daily basis many of
which we've we've been exposed to for
the entirety of our lives to the fact
that you know leisure time physical
activity is at an all-time low to the
fact that our food supply has become
saturated with ultra-processed foods to
the fact that our circadian clocks are
completely out of wax so the genius life
i really explore all of the facets of
what it takes to live
healthy i include nutrition and diet as
well
but it's really packed with sort of the
the little changes that you can make in
your day-to-day life that are gonna have
big wins in terms of your health when
you were doing the research what was
something that really surprised you
well i think it was kind of uh you know
it was scary the degree to which um the
odds are stacked against the average
human and and that was very eye-opening
but it was also something what's
the odds against us well just the fact
that you know whether it's access to
healthy food or air pollution or
you know the industrial chemicals that
we use to clean or even create our
domiciles you know our homes
um we're just we're inundated with with
exposures that are not doing our biology
any favors
um so those are the uh that's what i
mean i mean today
uh
it's it's frightening when you look
around you see people that are you know
struggling with overweight with being
obese um 66 of the population is either
overweight or obese half the population
is either pre-diabetic or has type 2
diabetes which we know both of those
conditions is actually a late marker for
chronically elevated insulin or
hyperinsulinemia
which can go on for years if not decades
before your blood sugar actually starts
to inch up you know to a degree that a
doctor would measure it um
so
you know
people are not well um if you live to
the age of 85 you have a one in two
chance of being diagnosed with
alzheimer's disease
um certain cancers are increasing in
their frequency in the 1960s a woman's
lifetime risk of developing breast
cancer uh was one in 20 today it's about
one in eight
so there's obviously been a mutation in
our environments our genes haven't
changed all that much
and yet the default state for any
organism is health but you look around
and people are not healthy people are
not feeling well when you look in the
mirror i mean i want your listeners to
kind of introspect for a minute and ask
whether or not you feel healthy whether
or not you feel
virile and vital and well
and
i wrote this book and i became obsessed
with with this topic and really
communicating this message to
any anybody who will listen ultimately
because my mom was so sick
and i feel in many ways that she was the
canary in the coal mine for the modern
way of life reading the book i didn't
realize that she died of cancer so i
knew obviously from your last book from
talking to you that she had dementia
early which is [__] terrifying
uh but then to hear that she got cancer
on top of that is pretty gnarly
um
if you like going through that process
like what was that like as you're
researching the book and you're
obviously getting clues as to what is
bombarding her
how do you process through that how do
you think about that yeah i mean all i
have are hypotheses so i'll never claim
to know what was the cause of either my
mom's dementia which she developed at a
very young age at the age of 58
or the fact that
over labor day of 2018 she was diagnosed
with pancreatic cancer
um
ironically in both instances with both
diagnoses
what i experienced in every doctor's
office that i you know went to with my
mom was diagnosed and adios uh in in
both scenarios
the treatment options that were
afforded to my mom were were very
limited um
with dementia you know i mean anybody
with a loved one with dementia will tell
you that you get prescribed these
biochemical band-aids and they do very
little in terms of disease management
they certainly have no disease modifying
effect
my mom was on
you know all of the drugs that were
available to her for her for her memory
function
and then my mom happened to have a
particularly gnarly form of cancer she
developed pancreatic cancer and we
realized this when over labor day she
turned yellow
which is um you know if you turn you can
turn yellow there's there's probably two
major reasons why a person would turn
yellow one is if you're eating too much
beta carotene uh and then your skin
turns yellow but not the eyes the whites
of your eyes then there's another
condition called jaundice which is when
your skin and your eyes turn yellow and
that's because bilirubin which is the
pigment that
is released into your digestive tract
which gives stool its color that that
dark yellow almost brownish color
isn't able to flush out and then backs
up it seeps into your skin it seeps into
the whites of your eyes and that can be
caused by generally speaking one of two
conditions one a gallstone
and that's what we were all praying that
my mom had but when they did the mri of
my mom's abdomen what it turns out she
actually had was a tumor on her pancreas
that was pressing into her bile duct
and pancreatic cancer i believe 90
something percent of the time is
diagnosed
when it's already in an advanced stage
and that was certainly true for my mom
when it was diagnosed for my mom she was
already in stage four which means that
the cancer had already spread they found
lesions on her
liver and
you know my mom's quality of life at
that point was already so degraded due
to the dementia and the parkinsonian
symptoms that she also had the movement
symptoms the stiffness
but still i thought that i was going to
have my mom
you know you never you never think to
yourself that you're that your mom is
not going to be here
um
you know in in any way that's
you know that that transmits the urgency
of a terminal illness and when my mom
was diagnosed over labor day
because it was already in stage four and
because my mom was already so ill with
her dementia there was nothing that they
could offer her and so they gave us a
prognosis of three to six months
immediately she went into hospice care
was she able to like grasp what was
happening
uh
you know it's it's really hard to say
she
the [__] the cognition was really
straight you know constrained um at that
stage
she there were a few windows of lucidity
i i remember clear as day you know one
they when they did the surgery
to unblock the bile duct they put a
stent in so that the bilirubin can then
go into the
you know can can properly drain into the
gi tract
after that before that surgery
she
could barely speak
um
there was there was basically no
communication and you know her cognition
really was um was affected to a
significant degree the other thing is
that bile
is how we and we can talk about this
later in the episode is how one of the
major routes of excretion of toxins so
if you have dementia and then you have
this bilirubin back up into the blood
it's basically it's it's hyper toxic to
the brain
and so when they stented that bile duct
and suddenly you know her color began to
return to normal there was like a day or
two where she seemed almost normal it
was shocking
um
but ironically we
we didn't
tell her about the diagnosis really in
the you know in that in those immediate
um hours following the
following the diagnosis because
we wanted to be sure that it was what it
was and
they
when they do a diagnosis with mri it's
not um it's not certain until they they
do a biopsy in my mom's case they kind
of they thought that it was you know
that that that it was pretty clear
but
we were just so sensitive to to my mom
and the mood and
life had just become so difficult for
her and all of us
that we wanted to be sure that it was
what it was and so we had to wait for
the biopsy
you know they took cells when they
performed that that stenting procedure
and
lo and behold you know a week or two
later
they confirmed that it was cancer and
um that's when we told my mom and when
we told my mom
it was heartbreaking i don't think that
she
she she understood what she had but it
didn't hit her the way that it would hit
you or i
um
she made a couple of comments you know
that were just truly heartbreaking i
mean
how do you tell you know your mom that
she's dying like that's the most
difficult conversation that i think any
human being can possibly have or or any
loved one for that matter i mean it's
just inconceivable like the whole the
whole thing to me to this day is still
unbelievable i ca i can't believe it it
feels like a nightmare it doesn't feel
like real life
um
but we uh yeah we we told her and her
cognition
you know
started to begin a slow and gradual
decline again
um
she made a comment once that just you
know it i'll never forget it she
it was a testament to her you know
to how much she loved me and my brothers
i have two younger brothers
um
but it's also and and how much she loved
us but
it just so clearly shows you how evil
dementia can be she said something
you know after that after the after we
told her about the diagnosis
she started crying and she she said what
am i going to do without you guys
as if we were right going somewhere
you know not it was clear that it wasn't
clicking or or that something was being
lost in translation
because you know it it sounded like we
were going somewhere but in reality you
know she was going somewhere and i was
thinking in the back of my head
what are you going to do without us what
the f are we gonna do without you
and um and yeah it was i mean that was
those were the worst three months of my
entire life i mean i can't even it was
just awful it was wrought with pain and
you know the the
palliative care is just
you know being there for somebody in
that condition and having to to drop you
know
you know take a dropper of morphine and
administer it to it's just like it's
it's awful i don't think human beings
should have to
deal with that i mean i you know it made
me
intrigue you know
more interested in um physician-assisted
suicide and things like that because not
that not that not that we would have
pulled that trigger but the end the very
end it was just it was terrible it was
awful dude so my cousin died of cancer
really aggressive cancer he was super
[__] young like mid-20s
and i went to see him a couple days
before he died and i thought the same
[__] thing i'm sitting there in the
hospital and i i was impressed because
his mentality was i will never give up
not to the bitter [__] end
and i respect that dude i respect that
that's my [__] mindset like all the
way get across the finish line do
whatever the [__] it takes and i'm
watching him though
literally struggle for every single
[__] breath of air
and i'm just asking like
where is this going
and at what point do you say
actually what i want is
peace i want to rest and i get it like
when there's any element of maybe maybe
if i just fight hard enough i can pull
out of this
and like you said i don't know would i
pull the trigger i i really think in my
own case i would and when i look at and
i don't know um enough about robin
williams case to know how deep he was
into the disease and all that but like i
kind of get it man like there there's
just no joy to be had at the end for
anybody and at some point to me like i'm
not a i'm not a person who thinks that
um if all that's left is extreme
suffering that the life still makes
sense i think that's a choice the person
should get to make for themselves 100
like i would never make that decision
for somebody else but [__] me man for my
own sake if i had been in his position
watching it i'd be like yeah this this
is a no-brainer like i want to kiss
everybody goodbye i want to have one
last laugh and
and thank you book at night like that
that is just the only thing that makes
sense to me having witnessed that now
going through it maybe i'll feel
different maybe like that sense of
fighting is the right answer but whoa
like from the outside it looked super
super gnarly it's super gnarly i mean
there are things you see that that
just change you you know i mean the fact
that i that i'm not more traumatized
from it
uh is is almost a shock because it's
just you witness things that are so
barbaric so
inhuman um
i mean
to i was there with my mom until until
the end to to witness somebody dying and
not just somebody but the person who you
love more than anybody any uh human
being on earth
um fade away it's just uh
it's gutting to the nth degree there's
really there's really no words and you
know the hospice nurses that worked with
my mom they were angels they were
amazing
but um it it reaffirmed to me the value
of
taking care of yourself while you can
you know in the words of john f kennedy
the time to fix the roof is when the sun
is shining because when you're sick
it's just it's a lot harder to undo
years of of you know damage
that oftentimes we do to ourselves i
mean not all the damage is is something
that we have agency over as i mentioned
you know the modern world we're flush up
against myriad industrial chemicals that
are probably not helping the cause but
you really have to do what you can while
you're young and healthy
to avert these kinds of conditions
and
it's been just this lifelong journey of
trying to unravel what it was about my
mom's life my mom's circumstances that
led to her becoming so ill was she just
a genetic
fluke that she was so ill for so long i
don't think so i mean i don't i you know
and i hope not because that would that
wouldn't bode well very well for my
health but
um
but yeah i mean i think i think we
really ought to do what we can and so
that's why
i've dedicated myself to learning and
communicating as best as i can these
principles yeah now i want to hear how
you
sort of rebound from that and if
if you're doubling down on the work and
that's a way out because i had a my
roommate former roommate from college
he was on a path it was really
interesting to see where he was going to
go producing film like the whole nine
and
then his mom got a brain tumor
and in the removal of the brain tumor
she basically developed dementia-like
symptoms
and was type 2 diabetic and watching him
go through that it it changed him so
fundamentally and he
he 180 on his life just changed
everything up moved took a totally
different path
and
he when he was going through it like he
had this daily heartbreak so she's got
dementia so she doesn't remember
anything but she's type 2 diabetic so
she he has to be on her about what she's
eating and he was like dude you you
can't imagine what it's like every day
to have to retell my mom that she's a
type 2 diabetic and that she can't have
the things that she wants because she
keeps coming and asking for a glass of
orange juice or whatever and he's like
every day i have to tell her again that
she can't have it
and it was like
you know you just get to the point where
you're asking that same fundamental
question at what point is her quality of
life so low that none of this makes
sense anymore and to watch him go
through that like you said to see the
person you love most in the world fading
away like
it's gnarly and so
i i lost touch with him at that point he
he just went off the radar this is all
pre social media um
so i'm curious like as you're going
through that
how do you rebuild like what is your
coping mechanism been
it's been
i'm so great you know i mean
people love to bash on social media but
the fact that i have that i've been so
transparent and open about my
motivations and
my story with my followers the fact that
they were there to to send feedback and
love and this you know this outpouring
of love
i really felt it um when when
i was going through that and my mom
passed away
i have channeled a lot of the the angst
about losing my mom into my work i'm
very lucky that i get to do that that i
get to write about it that i get to
um
be that i get to feel creatively
expressed
in many ways although my work is about
health and science and nutrition and all
that stuff i also feel very much like an
artist and i think what artists are is
that they you know what they do is they
transmute pain they take pain and they
turn it into something meaningful um
you know and
i've done that pretty much my whole life
i've been
you know when i went through heartbreak
uh in
i think was around 2008
i uh it inspired me to become a musician
because i found that music was a great
way to
to communicate the pain that i was
feeling in regards to my heart being
broken
when
my mom started going through this the
best way that i
that i knew to
to deal with it in a way that
made me feel like this wasn't all going
to be in vain
was to use it to help and inspire other
people to live healthier and to learn
more about their bodies about their
biology and
my intention really has never been to
to
be called an expert a health expert or
anything like that it was really to be
an example for people
because
i don't believe that you need to be a
phd or an md or a registered dietitian
to understand how your body works and
how you enter you know how your food
interacts with your biology and how
light interacts with your biology and
how exercise and sleep and you know all
these things that are so crucial when it
comes to living well i think
uh it's a disservice to humanity
humanity to expect these
um
these these incredible knowledge bases
that we have thanks to science to be
siloed off into their respective
um
you know academic
fields and so
my own curiosity my own thirst for
knowledge about these topics especially
in the wake of my mom's sickness and
ultimately her passing
um it's i've just put i've been for the
past you know better part of a decade
insatiable about trying to understand
why this would have happened to her
and and what i could do to prevent it
from happening to myself so that's been
a really great
outlet um
it's uh it's sort of like an
intellectual punching bag you know
because science is so complex it's so
nuanced and it's so dense and and
there's so much to learn you know and
there's just like there's no way that
you're going to be able to understand
everything but trying to trying to wrap
your head
around the conceptual vastness of of our
biology and and
and health as a whole it's uh
it's a project um that you know that it
just it doesn't end and so it's been to
be able to pour myself into that and to
be able to do it now professionally um
for a living it's just uh i'm
eternally grateful to to people who have
supported my work and
um
and yeah and i only hope that it
provides you know inspiration
uh for others
it's interesting that you call yourself
an artist because reading the book which
is dense with very useful scientific
information um there were parts in the
book where you talk about things like
rapamycin that i've heard other people
talk about be talked about in a way that
was accessible and made it easier for me
to sort of grasp and understand and mtor
and all that stuff which is super
[__] fascinating but um you make it
accessible and there was a part in the
book where i felt like the human
come through into the the whole equation
where you were talking about
diet and its impact and all that but you
said you know at the end when my mom um
was really struggling man my trips were
to the bakery and getting her things
that she loved not that [__] that's so
interesting
um i'd be curious to hear like
in that like the the book i want you now
to write is the like
how you deal with this stuff because i
feel like you dealt with that artfully
your ability to speak on it is
incredible the fact that you invited
your followers in on that journey and
all that stuff
uh was really really cool so why because
that is exactly what i would do and i
would feel a little guilty about it but
it's like if i knew the end was nigh for
someone that i cared about and they
wanted the exact thing that i thought
was problematic i'd still go out to them
well yeah i mean we're that's it's a
it's a it's a really important question
to ask and it's another area where i've
just learned so much you know about
about
health communication and diet because of
what i went through with my mom so
you know what you're referencing is the
fact that and i think a lot of people in
the health space and especially in the
keto community whenever the term cancer
comes up people are you know can be very
zealous about uh you know putting people
on this ketogenic diet which is supposed
to starve the cancer cell and the
reality is it's not that easy like
cancer cells are notorious for mutating
and using alternate energy energy
substrates when they have to
um and
you know
if if you were in an earlier stage of
cancer
maybe that would be something that would
that could be potentially available to
you you know dr walter longo at usc is
doing you know amazing work on on the
role of fasting and how fasting can
potentially sensitize a patient
uh a tumor cell or or tumor rather to
chemotherapy while protecting the
patient so there's all these amazing
things going on in the world of
nutrition
um and and
and ketogenesis as it relates to cancer
and all that stuff but when you have
somebody who's in a later stage of
cancer they're battling against
something called cachexia which is
extreme muscle wasting
and so for that patient
you really want to
that patient what they need most is just
calories and when a patient has no
appetite well how are you going to get
them to eat unless it's a really
delicious food food you were doing it
because when i read that i actually read
it totally differently so i assumed it
was
man she just i can bring a little joy
into her world because look obviously
depending on where we're at in the
journey the answer is very different so
if it's you know somebody's just being
diagnosed and there's a shot that they
can get out of this like [__] i'd have
them in the gym eating perfectly doing
the fasting like the whole [__]
rigmarole yeah but once we're like yo
this doesn't there's no reversing this
like we know we're at the end then it's
like hey
bring on what little joys you can yeah
and that's what i thought you meant in
the book when you said that but you were
just trying to battle cachexia well it
was both to bring her joy it was that i
would go to my mom's favorite
um pastry shop in new york which is
called vigneros and on the lower east
side of manhattan
and i would buy her cannolis and
strawberry shortcake because i know that
those were my mom's favorite things to
eat and i knew that there was no dietary
intervention in the world that was going
to help my mom
at that point and for somebody who has
no appetite cancer patients
don't have an appetite they can barely
you know eat
you really want to get them the foods
that are going to just provide calories
energy just so that they don't
completely waste away
um
i
had a around that time i i learned
kind of the hard way or not the hard way
but i
you know a lot of people love to hate on
inshore which is uh this like sugar
slurry of you know unhealthy oils and
whatever but it's you know ensure
is is marketed on the one hand probably
to older adults you know as a protein
supplement and for that purpose i think
that that's you know not a good product
i wouldn't i wouldn't use it for that
but on the other hand if it's a product
that's engineered to be as palatable as
possible while providing you know your
basic level of multivitamin support
um
then maybe that's going to be a better
better option than trying to cram a
protein shake down a cancer patient's
throat that's not going to be as
palatable and so i began buying an
interesting man it's super interesting i
would buy my mom for example protein
shakes because i was like all right
gotta fight cacaxia we gotta keep the
protein intake high because we know that
that's gonna you know help maintain
muscle which we know you know eating
higher amounts of uni first of all
protein's essential but and my mom was
barely getting any so i was you know on
the one hand i wanted her to have a
higher protein
option
but those kinds of shakes especially
when they're low carb they're sweetened
with artificial sweeteners that are just
not as palatable as sugar unfortunately
and though i would never drink an ensure
shake and i wouldn't i wouldn't you know
recommend
its consumption to anybody who is
healthy uh it actually it's something
that my mom enjoyed more and would drink
more of than the protein shake that i
tried to get her to drink
and
so that's kind of a
that's a that's a mind [__] really
because
at the end of the day you you're you're
trying to basically put calories into a
person's mouth
um and they're they're withering away at
an
unforced you know at a rate that you
just can't conceive of
um because the cancer is just so hungry
and so yeah so when i would go to the
pastry shop you know i wasn't about to
try to put my mom on a ketogenic diet
you're just you're past that point
um
you've you've you've reached the escape
velocity at which point you really just
need to think about survival you're not
thinking about fighting the cancer
you're just trying to like buy days you
know weeks if you're lucky but really
days are there places in america where
assisted suicide is legal
i believe in oregon oregon is the one
state that i know of yeah that's
interesting that's one of those things
man i'm sure there are people that
understand sort of the way religion
works its way through america and law
that get why it's illegal but i don't
[__] get it like i legitimately do
not understand how like people are weird
about that if somebody if somebody
certainly of sound mind decides that's
what they want to do then
yeah i don't get how that's illegal i'm
not going to say that i would have even
brought that up to my mom i'm you know i
don't know if she would have been into
it i you know it's just abstracting it
from your mom like that just seems to me
like a self-evident thing that you
should be able to do that if
that's what you want to do yeah first of
all you're not going to stop people if
they want to do it they're going to do
it and then second to make them do like
horrific stupid [__]
i get it man i wouldn't want people to
do it i certainly wouldn't want people
to do it because it's a mood disorder
but
oh man if you have a terminal illness
well
you know i mean
yeah even if it was just a few hours
earlier but then
you know the the
all of the hours that i had with my mom
you know i mean i've spent many many
many hours thinking to myself since my
mom's passing how
much i would have appreciated even
another second or two with my mom so
you know i'm not gonna say that that's a
that's an easy decision to make and
actually if you think about it in a way
when you start giving higher doses of
morphine i mean that is in a way
physician-assisted suicide because
morphine suppresses your respiratory
system and so the more pain there is the
more morphine you start getting i mean
there's some suggestion in the
literature that uh morphine actually
accelerates
um
you know a person's a person's demise
it's just a it's a
horrible drug but it's a it's a one of
the best if not the best or it's one of
the best pain relievers that we have
there are stronger drugs but
uh
so yeah it's just
it's dehumanizing and it's and it's
crazy and i'm so grateful that my mom
was able to be in her own bed um when it
when it happened and that you know we
had the hospice nurses that we had that
me and my brothers were there for her
but it was terrible so my any and i'm
not alone so many people are struggling
with illness cancer related deaths
alzheimer's dementia and so my heart
goes out to them it's just a it's a
terrible
thing and and you know i think we ought
to
support scientific research we have to
uh because we're still a long way away
from knowing what causes cancer in each
you know
each cancer type alone but then in each
individual patient it's probably a
different slew of of insults that lead
to the the
you know the creation and and you know
growth of tumors and so
um
got to support the science but also i
think it's important to also try to live
in a way that is going to minimize your
risk
one of the things you talked about in
the book that
it's been on my radar for a while but i
know very little about it is
environmental toxins
what are some of the big things that
people should be avoiding what are the
ones that are just [__] ever present
so environmental toxins i talk about
this quite a bit in the book and
unfortunately i don't really have a
strong sense of how they would have
related to what my mom developed
but certainly there are certain cancers
in the body that are sensitive to the
way our hormones fluctuate
breast cancer prostate cancer would be
the two primary examples
but generally speaking we're inundated
with
industrial
pollutants whether it's the fine
particulate matter in the air that we
breathe if we live in you know a
polluted city many many americans live
in you know in in polluted areas do air
filters work air purifiers can work hepa
filters a hepa vacuum
and a hepa air filter is one of the best
ways of removing um
fine particles from the air pm 2.5 is
essentially what it's called it's the
most dangerous what's pm 2.5 it's
basically the uh the measurement of the
particles so there's pm size
yeah okay so it's particulate matter 2.5
i believe it's nanometers okay so the
smaller the more dangerous the smaller
the more dangerous that's why vaping is
bad vaping's not good for you although
but is that part of what the beef is is
that it's such a fine particle size
that's not why vaping is bad vaping is
bad i think because of the vitamin e
acetate that's now in these in these you
know vaping solutions that people are
inhaling and it's it's causing illness
uh but fine particulate matter generally
is like
magnetite and iron and and actual metals
that we inhale through the air that are
created in the burning of coal
in you know vehicle uh exhaust um
sloughed off from any number of
industrial processes and it's like
literally metal
for example magnetite they've been able
to identify
uh magnetite in the brains in mexico
city of toddlers essentially because
these particles are so small they're
able to pierce them they enter
circulation easily and they pierce the
blood-brain barrier and they're able to
actually accumulate in the hippocampus
where they cause inflammation they've
been shown to
um
cause the aggregate of plaques that are
associated with alzheimer's disease but
in young people
amyloid beta is one of the primary
proteins that's involved in the in the
um in alzheimer's disease it's basically
it's the backbone of the plaque that
characterizes the disease and amyloid
beta is not necessarily a bad thing it's
bad when it you know creates these
plaques that gunk up the brain
but i think the the
current sort of understanding of what
this protein is meant to do in the brain
it's sort of there to actually initially
protect it against inflammatory insults
how's it protecting it so is it uh like
finding a particle or a virus and like
wrapping it like one like a pearl does a
grain of sand is it something like that
that's a very that's a very good analogy
yeah basically it basically encapsulates
it and the the research that they're
doing on this is coming i think
predominantly out of harvard um they're
showing this with the herpes virus that
people that have herpes or people with
alzheimer's generally they can find
herpes in the brain
um and that it's amyloid seems to
basically like
protect the brain it's initially trying
to protect the brain from this virus and
so it wraps it up and it causes the
proteins to cross link and and aggregate
and misfold and
uh form these plaques so the same thing
conceivably can happen with
um and it seems to be happening with
fine particulate matter and there is an
interesting relationship between
exposure to air pollution and one's risk
for developing
uh alzheimer's disease and though
alzheimer's disease is the most common
form of dementia it's not the only form
of dementia and my mom
lived throughout her life in new york
city which is you know now i think the
air is a bit cleaner but
um it's a city that for many many many
years has had
uh problems with with air pollution so
yeah that's a major one i mean
clean air and there are a few things
that you can do to to
protect yourself against this i think
you know getting a good air filter
especially in your um personal breathing
space
uh there was a
there's a great book i'm forgetting oh
dr wolverton i think it's his first name
was bill bill wolverton he was a nasa
research scientist and he looked at
plants
and um
he analyzed the rate at which plants are
able to sort of clean the air and he did
this because you could essentially put a
plant on board of a space shuttle and
provide clean air to you know to the
astronauts and so there's actually did
that
he
i don't know if they actually went
through with it they may be
but that's what he was studying
with his time at nasa and since then
he's written a book
i believe the book is called how to have
clean air or how to clean your air or
something like that
or how to plant fresh air or grow fresh
air or something like it's a really cool
book i cite it in in mine and he
basically
lists out all the plants in ascending
order and i have the top ten in my book
genius foods or the genius life
plants that are basically able to clean
the air for you which is great they're
able to reduce uh levels of formaldehyde
which leeches out into the air from you
know wood furniture and carpets and
couches and things like that
another big problem for people well i
would say
plastic related compounds are some of
the most common
um everywhere compounds that uh that
we're just inundated with on a
day-to-day basis and they do affect the
way that our hormones work
compounds like phthalates and bisphenol
a are what are called xenoestrogens
they is bisphenol a bpa bpa yes
um although now consumers are starting
to get wise to the potential dangers of
bpa and so you'll see a lot of products
that are bpa free but that doesn't mean
that they're free of
chemically similar compounds like bp
s and bpf so essentially it's created
this chemical game of whack-a-mole where
as soon as consumers become aware of a
compound you know industry is very quick
to pivot and then use actually they're
able to sort of hijack the fears of the
consumer to then make health claims
about their products like this
no bpa but um but a lot of them do you
avoid plastic like at every conceivable
turn um i try to without driving myself
too crazy so if i'm traveling and i
don't i can't find water in a glass
bottle then yeah i will drink from
plastic even though i know it's not
ideal because the reality is you can't
escape these compounds so trying to is a
completely futile effort so by you not
drinking you know avoiding drinking
water when you're thirsty because it may
come in a plastic bottle doesn't make a
lot of sense because we're just
inundated with these compounds the best
that we can do is to minimize our
exposure to them and to help our bodies
to facilitate the purging of toxins that
we have already accumulated how do we do
that
so when it comes to detoxing a lot of
people are spending money on overpriced
teas and supplements and things like
that but the reality is uh what i like
to talk about the three p's of detoxing
it's peeing pooping and perspiring
and this is literally i mean crucially
important because whether it's heavy
metals or phthalates or parabens or bpa
or
pfas chemicals which basically include
um
it's an umbrella category for the
chemicals that are sometimes used to
create teflon pans or non-stick pans
uh which are also incidentally found in
dental tape so if you're using dental
tape not dental floss you want to switch
over dental tape yeah i've heard of
dental tape like it's the glide dental
dental floss that's like it's actually
called dental tape it says it right on
dental tape yeah interesting yeah okay
so no dental tape all dental floss all
dental floss it's gonna be better
cleaning your teeth and you're not using
teflon essentially yep interesting yeah
and they've shown that they can actually
enter circulation
um you want to be very careful with your
do you cook with teflon what do you cook
with
i don't know i use a cast iron pan i use
stainless steel it doesn't stick
uh
it
not if you if you cook with them the
right way what about ceramic ceramic can
be good do they make ceramic uh frying
pans they do make ceramic frying pans
yeah yeah yeah interesting you just want
to be careful with the coating the most
teflon ever
don't use dental tape yeah but i cook in
teflon pans
there is a product and i have uh no
affiliation with them whatsoever but
they're called green pan and i've
discovered them on my own and i've i've
purchased you know one or two of their
pans with you know with my money um they
claim to not have any of these of these
chemicals in them um
and i think that the that they that they
claim that they're free of all related
compounds as well so
i think the jury is still out
but
it may be a better option i don't know
but generally yeah you want to you want
to support your body's own detox detox
detoxification and you can do that
by eating in a way that's going to
support digestive health you know
consuming lots of uh
vegetables fiber in general but
especially cruciferous vegetables i'm a
big fan of because of their ability to
stoke our body's own detox pathways um
and i heard you talking about one of
your favorite is baby uh broccoli
sprouts broccoli sprouts i've never even
heard of broccoli sprouts yeah baby
broccoli um i've heard of broccolini but
this is different broccolini yeah so
you've got baby broccoli at the sort of
those are the infants and then you've
got broccolini and then you've got full
adult grown broccoli i think that's
pretty much how it goes don't don't
quote me but but broccoli sprouts are
baby it's you know it's like three or
four day old broccoli and you can just
buy broccoli seeds and you can what is
it high end that makes it so useful so
broccoli sprouts are very high in a
compound called sulforaphane
in fact one
pound of broccoli sprouts are the
equivalent of a hundred pounds of
broccoli in terms of their capacity to
produce this compound and this is useful
in the detoxification
yeah so it basically it's a very
effective um up regulator of a gene
pathway in our body is called the nrf2
pathway
which is a detoxification pathway it
increases levels of glutathione in the
body which is our body's master
antioxidant and detoxifier
when something is detoxifying because
whenever i hear people talk about
detoxifying they sound crazy yeah so
what is actually happening in
detoxification well for one it's you're
basically telling your liver to create
more glutathione which does what so if
amyloid plaques go into the brain
surround a virus or a particle i get
that yeah i understand how that works
you can't detox viruses you can't detox
amyloid but you can detox certain of
these compounds that are fat soluble
and doing well the liver does the liver
makes them water-soluble so they can be
more easily excreted and the liver what
are they doing are they running around
grabbing things like what are they what
are they removing from the body like
this poor kid in mexico city who's
breathing in metals it's crossing the
blood-brain barrier the only way to lock
that up or can that be detoxified i know
people get heavy metal poisoning like
and then they supposedly detoxify like
what is actually happening at a cellular
level they can be detoxified so
so something is going on
certain heavy metals can be chelated by
your body
chelated is that wrapping procedures
when you basically wrap a heavy metal
and you excrete it okay and you're
wrapping it in glutathione
uh you could wrap it in glutathione they
can be disarmed by selenoproteins which
are selenium-based enzymes in the brain
this happens with mercury
um so there's for each compound there's
sort of like a different way in which
they're detoxed
some of some compounds are not as easily
excreted through our poop and our pee
and we have to sweat them out like
cadmium cadmium is a good example of
that
um so it's different for every compound
and i can't you know i don't pretend to
know the detox route for everything but
the
is sending out the things yeah things
you like how technical that is it's
sending out the things that are gonna go
and grab all these and it it somehow
takes it to if it's cadmium it's taking
it to sweat if it's something else it's
p if it's something else it's poop like
that's the
yeah i mean you have so your liver has
two detox phases there's phase one detox
and phase two
and in the first phase i believe it's
making these compounds water soluble
that's so that they can be more easily
excreted it's making the toxins
water-soluble yeah somehow yes
um and then
yeah they can be excreted by the kidneys
in our pee
or
you know they get excreted into our bile
which is another reason why
you know
i think that when my mom had these this
biliary and this bile back up
into her circulation
it was essentially causing a buildup of
toxins because
um
that's one major route of exit for these
for these toxic chemicals and that's why
eating fiber is so important because it
basically traps them in your poop and
this also actually happens interestingly
with cholesterol
so a lot of people struggle with
i mean we could debate
um high cholesterol versus low
cholesterol and
and what that really means from the
standpoint of health but i think if you
have very high cholesterol you know
there's probably it's probably a marker
that something is not going right in the
body give me what what do you consider
high
like
to talk about cholesterol intelligently
don't you have to start talking particle
size and fluffiness and all that stuff
yeah so i talked about that quite a bit
in um genius foods and i think that your
normal calculated ldl that you get on a
on a blood lab it's not
super
um telling when it comes to your overall
health i think uh and i'm not a medical
doctor so i don't you know diagnose uh
you know or or or talk about individuals
you know risk for heart disease or
anything like that but yes i think the
the particle number generally speaking
gives you a better sense of the
recycling machinery in the body and how
effectively your liver is is recycling
lipids like ldl cholesterol which if
allowed to back up in the blood and
linger in the blood for too long it's
more prone to oxidation it's more prone
to becoming a small and dense particle
that can more easily
get stuck to the endothelium
which is the lining of your blood
vessels and then form what ultimately
becomes a foam cell and that's the
beginning of an you know atherogenic
plaque
but
cholesterol is actually used to create
bile acids which is how we digest and
assimilate fats through the digestive
tract and your liver uses cholesterol
that it sucks out from circulation to
create these bile acids and it gets
squirted essentially by your gallbladder
into your gi tract and when you consume
certain types of fiber
i've actually become interested in
psyllium husk because psyllium husk has
been shown to actually do this it's able
to sequester cholesterol so they can't
be reabsorbed back in
to circulation at the lower end of the
small intestine
and
that's the exact same mechanism by which
fiber can help us better excrete
environmental toxins i think it's also
one of the reasons because the
cholesterol grabs it and then the fiber
grabs the cholesterol because the fiber
just grabs the bile the bile acids which
contain these toxins so it basically
disallows for the reabsorption of toxins
that are contained in the bottle
and i think it's probably one of the
reasons why dietary fiber consumption is
associated with reduced risk for certain
cancers so breast cancer is one of them
um eating more vegetables allowed
because the toxin is not reabsorbed into
the body yeah
interesting yeah so
just when i was going to give up all
vegetables and i'm not going to go
carnivore dude i'm a lazy carnivore so i
don't go out of my way to avoid things
so i'll have stuff like avocado
um i'll have if i'm at a restaurant and
there's some delicious broccoli i'll
have that because i dig broccoli or
brussels sprouts i'll have that but i i
easily will go a week 10 days without
any vegetable intake whatsoever
that's not quite true almost every day i
have unsweetened coconut
that's true i have pecans almost every
day
so
i get that but it's not really not
vegetable yeah um so
not fully carnivore like i said it's
lazy but i'll say that i don't know 80
of my calories come from
red meat just to really freak people out
yeah um i eat a lot of red meat too but
i also eat a lot of vegetables i think
that's where i'm like th this is the one
thing like normally when people like oh
there's so much conflicting information
i'm like yeah yeah yeah but like
sift through it you'll find that people
say like a lot of the same things but
this one like people go back and forth
very convincingly i might add from the
camp of no no vegetables hey they're
stuck their only defense mechanism is to
develop these toxins and
eating them you're eating the toxins and
that's why cultures have done things
like
um you know take the husk off or the
skin or make sure that the seeds are
absent or soak things or you know
pressure cook whatever the hell the
answer is to detoxify this stuff yeah i
think that there's there's definitely
some truth in there but sulforaphane
which is what we were talking about
before is one of those chemicals it's an
insect anti-feeding that's there
literally to protect this the plant
against
predation by
fungus by critters and things like that
in fact sulforaphane is only created
when you chew the raw plant because it
actually doesn't exist endogenously in
the plant it's created via the enzymatic
conversion of a compound in the plant
cell in a certain cell compartment
called uh
glucoraphanin it's a glucosinolate
compound and an enzyme which is found in
another compartment in the cell called
myrosinase so only when you chew the raw
plant which is what a critter would do
essentially do these two compounds get
to combine in your mouth and in your
digestive tract to create sulforaphane
which is this mildly toxic compound
that uh in us because we're so robust in
comparison to a fungus right uh or or an
insect for that matter um it actually
works to stimulate
um detox pathways in our body because it
is a mild toxin so how does that
simulate detox if it's a mild toxin i
get a hermetic response where a little
bit of bad is good but how is it
actually detoxing
well
because it it's basically it's that
hormetic response it's a xenohormetic
compound
that meaning it's a compound from
outside that we ingest
that is not you know
it's not a nutrient it's not a
macronutrient or a micronutrient it's a
plant you know insecticide essentially
that do you when when you talk hormetic
response so this is one of those where
like we'll hit a point where it goes
into black box territory for me where i
can give you the it's hormetic the body
like responds to a mild stressor by
getting stronger but i don't actually
know what the [__] is happening yeah do
you know what is happening in a hormetic
response is it
vary depending on what the thing is or
are there like your breakdown of
rapamycin and mtor and all that like i
can follow the train of logic
but
with
this yeah how does something that
releases a toxin how does that become a
detox pathway
i think because our bodies over
compensate i think because our bodies
what by by upregulating the nrf2 pathway
creating detox compounds like
glutathione
um
that just make it water-soluble or bind
it so that we can
urinate yeah it basically creates more
glutathione than would be needed to
disarm this compound and that has an
overall protective you know effect on
the body right so sulforaphane has been
shown to
boost glutathione in the brain
um which is amazing glutathione
a decrement of glutathione is associated
with depression dementia and things like
that um and then also i think that and
this is sort of a the new frontier for
science um it probably is also having a
hormetic effect on the microbiota like
the bacteria that live in our large
intestine
and this is sort of you know
unexp relatively unexplored territory
but uh you know certain compounds like
polyphenols which also act as hormetic
stressors you know xenohormesis um
are actually not all that bioavailable
uh to us like their absorption in
through the digestive tract into
circulation is actually pretty low
and yet the consumption of foods with
polyphenols is related to all kinds of
good things in terms of your health so
it's probably not you know 100 percent
the case that these compounds are being
absorbed and you know we're even
detoxing them but it's probably via
their you know
consumption by you know gut bacteria
that's releasing all these metabolites
that then get released into circulation
so
there's all these different potential
mechanisms but
uh
but that's what i think where i'm kind
of at odds with people that are on the
carnivore diet because it's like
you know
when you
heat meat for one you're creating all
kinds of toxic compounds and you know i
think in isolation is that true if
you're not charring it
you're saying no matter what heat
um no i mean charring is probably the
worst but i would be a very poor uh
excuse for a carnivore because i like to
cook my meat on a barbecue occasionally
and so inevitably you're going to be
creating heterocyclic amines you're
going to be creating ages you know which
is the mylard reaction which is why meat
browns
and and those compounds and others you
know those are not
necessarily good for you i think the
benefits of eating meat outweigh any
potential negatives that you get from
those compounds especially when
you know you eat the meat in the context
of a diet that includes vegetables and
fiber and things like that so
um so i think it's important to have
both
yeah that man that debate goes back and
forth and i find it so
if i'm really honest it's a convenience
thing so because i find it so convenient
to not have to prep vegetables um
and i so enjoy the way i feel when i'm
eating red meat
that i go in on it pretty hard yeah i go
on and go in on it pretty hard i would
say um
i mean i do think that that dietary
fiber is important uh you know and it's
like
in a way you're kind of grasping at
straws when it comes to nutrition
because you have
like the gold standard of
research that can prove cause and effect
is a randomized control trial and we're
never going to have long-term large
population rcts in humans that
uh
that can prove the benefits of one diet
over another especially these niche
diets like carnivore diets versus a more
omnivorous paleo diet
um
and so i think on the one hand you want
to kind of like hedge your bets but on
the other uh you know i think that
there's enough information where we can
say that certain plant compounds are in
fact very good for us and
um
and i also think in terms of like just
your overall happiness quotient and
dietary diversity uh you know and the
microbiome the microbiota i think it's
important to include these you know
these kinds of one thing you talk about
in the book though is that
just diversity of diet is not
necessarily that important in that
there's a few things that if you go and
you buy them and just cycle around on
these things that you're probably better
off yeah what are those things what are
the like five or ten things that we
should be buying and eating um yeah so
that's a good i'm glad you brought that
up so darius mozafarian he's a nutrition
researcher he's done a study and i cite
it in the book where um you know most
people say
you know they they parrot the old adage
of eating everything in moderation but
when you look at a person's diet um
people that tend to have more varied
diets tend to be including more
confectionary products sugar sweetened
beverages and things like that so
what i found is that the healthiest
people tend to buy an hour or narrower
range of foods and just eat the same
foods on loop
and so
i try to highlight books that are books
foods that have the highest capacity for
nutrient density that are going to
basically give your body what it needs
because when you look around
statistically most people aren't going
to be nutrient deficient in at least one
essential nutrient whether it's a
vitamin or mineral
or you know essential fatty acid or the
like
90 of people actually are deficient in
at least one essential nutrient and so
for me when i'm going to the supermarket
i'm really making an effort to shop
around the perimeter
um and this is probably advice that
you've had on your on your show many
times it's not rocket science but i
think it's important to reiterate that
most supermarkets are designed the same
way that the fresh perishable food is
found around the perimeter and it's the
aisles where the ultra processed foods
lie in weight and those ultra-processed
foods they're tempting but we now over
consume them about 60 of the calories
that your average person consumes comes
from these kinds of foods and for all
the variety that the modern supermarket
might present you the illusion of most
of the calories that we're consuming are
coming from just three plants wheat corn
and rice pulverized and ground into a
dust and
devoid of essential nutrients in fact
they often have to be added back in in
their synthetic form that's why if you
look at most commercial breads or wheat
snacks
they're all fortified with niacin with
folic acid with all these because most
people are nutrient deficient
and that's because the the standard
american diet basically encourages that
you know those nutrient deficiencies so
i advocate for
you know grass-fed beef wild salmon dark
leafy greens cruciferous vegetables
nuts seeds berries things like that
but in this book i think where i where i
depart from genius foods is i talk a lot
about the value of dietary protein i
think
dietary protein is crucially important
uh especially for a population that is
by and large um
overweight i think protein is a crucial
thing to try to prioritize at every meal
uh it's not only the most satiating of
the macronutrients you think more than
fat
i think more than fat for sure in fact
there's uh a hypothesis it's called the
protein leverage hypothesis that our
hunger mechanisms are basically dictated
by our requirement for amino acids so
when you're able when you eat the
protein that your body requires it
basically turns off your hunger
mechanisms and people who under eat
protein tend to eat more carbs and fat
not only that but protein is
thermogenically favorable in fact um you
burn what do you mean by that well fat
has nine calories per gram yep protein
and carbs have four calories per gram
but actually protein has three calories
per gram when you consider that about a
third of um
the
calories that uh you consume in the form
of protein are burned off via digestion
it's the thermic effect of feeding and
protein has the highest thermic
effect i have literally never heard of
that how's that possible yeah it's
basically three calories per gram so
you're saying the energy that it takes
me to
run the cycle of digesting the food yeah
interesting
yeah so interesting it's satiating so
sorry as a percentage of the calories
that it has
it is harder for me essentially to
digest protein takes more energy i don't
want to use the wrong words here yes
so because obviously um
that's interesting so
round numbers you're saying it takes a
calorie to
burn protein yeah how many calories does
it take to burn fat
uh i build i believe it's about five to
ten percent so
like a fraction of a calorie wow so it's
to burn protein what about carbs it's
about 30 yeah 20 to 30 percent carbs
similar to fat it's about five to ten
percent very low yeah interesting carbs
are easily assimilated um because
glucose is important for survival so i
mean basically when you consume a
complex carbohydrate the carbs are
cleaved
um
the it's a complex carb carbohydrate is
basically a long chain of glucose
um
that are essentially broken down i mean
even as you begin chewing a starch the
amylase enzyme in your saliva begins to
break down the carbohydrate
and
fat has a very low thermic effect um as
well but protein yeah about 30 percent
so no idea yeah it's
also um as i mentioned it's satiating uh
it fills you up
and it's crucial for maintaining and
building muscle mass which you know we
know is important
um
and i think people tend to
you know under appreciate protein but if
you think about it
it's rare that you tend to it's rare
that you'll that you'll over eat chicken
breast or
a piece of fish that doesn't happen with
protein it happens with hyperpalatable
processed foods it happens with you know
a baked potato that you throw butter on
top of like it's very those are very
easy foods to over consume
protein is not all that uh difficult to
overconsume so interesting so i i
agree that you're not likely to overeat
protein
um but i i did rabbit starvation for
about two years so for people that
haven't heard that term before rabbit
starvation is where you're basically
getting i probably was intaking about 85
percent of my calories in the form of um
literally chicken breast so it's just
protein wow and it's a miserable way to
live but i would say that it was
boring but i was probably
in terms of calories it's hard to say
because you're right i could probably
eat more calories of fat but like when
you're i did a four to one ketogenic
diet for a while
far more miserable than doing rapid
starvation it was grotesque all of your
meals um are
soft and gross and that was like i
didn't want to eat that was the first
diet where and when i say four to one i
mean for every combined gram of protein
and carbohydrate at four grams
of fat is a horrifying way to live wow
and i hey i was in ketosis homie and i
was also doing caloric restriction so
there was that that added to the misery
i had never been fat adapted so there
was keto flu like all of that i get it
that was part of the not fun but in
terms of like the actual meal itself
they were kind of gross um so i did not
find myself compelled to overeat at that
stage i was just super oily oily meals
super oily yeah super oily yeah i'm not
a big high fat advocate i mean i think
it's i'm gonna need you to define high
fat yeah because that that is the one
this is all anecdote i fully get it high
fat changed my [__] life forever
because when i did the four to one diet
i went from dude i had iced my wrists
every night for 15 years wow because i
was just in a chronic state of
inflammation which trust me when i die
young i'll be very angry about those
years of just knowing nothing about diet
um so for 15 years have all this
inflammation just think hey that's the
way that i am tough break kid and then i
meet peter ratia and dom d'agostino and
they're like hey [__] eat fat and i was
like dude i don't want to get fat i just
spent two years getting lean and they
were like basically they were so kind
but more or less dumb ass fat does not
make you fat i can't believe i had to go
through all this so the the thing that
everybody goes through where it's like
what do you mean fat's gonna make me fat
like i get it if it had been named
anything else uh i think people wouldn't
misunderstand it the way that they do
it's literally called the thing that
people don't want to be
so
i had to go through that i do the four
to one because i'm thinking cancer
protection so
um i really like the we were talking
before about change or die i'm one of
those people dude i can make any change
i need to if i think that it's going to
give me something that i want so
definitely want to live as long as
humanly possible so when i was told hey
do a therapeutic ketogenic diet four to
one get in this range where the
basically the ratio of your glucose your
blood glucose to
your
ketone levels i forget now what the
percentage was years ago but
i did that totally misery like i said
but my joint pain went away in two days
and so i was like holy [__] like i had
no idea that that was possible i didn't
know there's anything i could do to get
rid of that pain i had tried everything
do you know prolotherapy i do not know
all right so they inject a dextrose
solution into the joint
and i went and had it's basically sugar
water so the thinking is we make it's
low-grade inflammation your body is sort
of numb to it it's no longer
responding with resolving the issues so
let's hit it with this sugar water
solution cause massive inflammation and
the body will go and resolve the issue
so i was doing that for a while and
like didn't help nothing helped like it
just seemed like a forever thing so in
48 hours to to go from
this is a
a chronic issue in my life where i have
to ice i was icing so much i had burn
marks on the back of my wrists from just
having ice on them so often and to
my wrists feel normal
it was like taking a drug so i
immediately um after i did it for i
forget ten days three weeks something
doing the four to one as soon as my the
time that i had committed to doing it
was over i stopped but i was like i will
never take fat out of my diet again
because this seems incredibly powerful
that was i'm going to guess close to 10
years ago i haven't had the joint pain
since dude it's bananas so in terms of
like that the uh
the evangelical person who has lived
through it i am like a born again
christian with this [__] i am so diehard
to get people to try ketogenics i think
everybody has to try it it may not work
for you i fully get that there are
definitely people that respond either
don't respond or respond negatively
that's all real the amount of diversity
of reaction is [__] staggering i 10
years ago you could not have convinced
me that
like humans have such a varied response
like we have a kid here name's will
vietnamese kid he can [__] pack away
carbohydrates like there's no tomorrow
and whole food
but he can pack away rice by the pound
and he's lean as the day is long i if i
ate that same amount of rice you would
hear me get fatter i'm not joking like
i've run these experiments so i i can't
do it um i'll get inflamed i'll start
getting joint pain so he and i could eat
the same thing and have wildly different
responses my wife and i we can eat the
same thing and have wildly different
responses
legitimately eating the same thing for
us will put her in the hospital i don't
mean that as an exaggeration i actually
mean it will put her in the hospital
because she has microbiome issues so can
totally [__] her up but even before she
had that problem if we ate the she is
half my size dude
half
if we ate the same amount of calories
literally bite for bite she wouldn't
gain weight but she would sweat at night
and i would gain weight wow and i was
like i'm twice your [__] size i
crazy so
the the level of variability is massive
so i get that but i think everybody
should try it because if you're anything
like me and for decades you're eating
damaged fats and those damaged fats are
causing inflammation so i have a high
inflammation response strike two in the
my desire to live forever
high inflammation response so i have uh
there's a name for it it's something
graffia on the skin so you can write in
my skin not as much now but when i was
younger you could take your fingernail
and write your name and it would welt up
on my skin so i have like a very high
inflammation response which explains the
wrists but i was eating damaged fats i
had no concept that like trans fat was a
thing all
you ready for you want to hurt a little
did you hear how i grew up i do actually
so thank you uh so my mom
didn't want me she wanted me so i argued
about food i had like real food trauma
as a kid and i was a super picky eater
and so finally at 13 my mom was just
tired of arguing with me about it so she
said fine you can make your own food so
i wanted to make chicken nuggets because
of course we had a deep fat fryer in the
house as you do in tacoma
and she said no way you can't have
chicken nuggets they're not good for you
but you can't have turkey nuggets and
french fries so i ate deep fried turkey
nuggets and french fries almost every
night
for
five years wow from the time i was 13
until i graduated high school
and
that of course was exactly why i was
inflamed and then i go to college and
don't know any better so i keep eating
bad food like when i first went low carb
i would go to panda express
i would get orange chicken but no rice
because i had no concept that sugar
could hide in a sauce that didn't make
sense to me so
i had just i had years of
in taking things in places that i didn't
realize i was in taking them so getting
your fat source right
not taking in damaged fats getting
healthy fats
i think for a lot of people that
struggle with inflammation it is
admittedly a game of not eating a lot of
things but then because i went for two
years
literally
dude this is so close to accurate that
i'll just make this statement all i ate
was steamed broccoli and boiled chicken
breast so i'm not the guy that's like
i'm eating chicken and broccoli i don't
understand the problem and then you
watch me eat it and i've got orange
sauce on it and you know i'm putting
like all these different sauces and
dressings and it was
boiled [__] chicken breast and
steamed broccoli and i got shredded
shredded so i've seen the photos on your
instagram
it worked from that perspective but from
a joint inflammation perspective it was
a nightmare so
for sure it was the addition of fat
because i had already removed all of the
pro-inflammatory stuff so this was a
deficiency in
either just the fat or whatever all the
other things are the red meat contains
and maybe that's it maybe it maybe it's
not the fat but
well there's no
there's no doubt that certain fats are
good for you so i guess i should clarify
i'm not i'm not against high fat at all
because i am very interested in a
ketogenic diet and in fact i think i
advocate for seasonal ketosis
um or or at the very least intermittent
ketosis whatever that means to you i
think it's important to you know on a
maybe daily
monthly seasonal basis to
uh you know allow your brain access to
ketones which are you know a quote
unquote super fuel that can supply 60 of
your brain's energy which um
you know is now being studied for it's
been used for over a century for you
know to treat hard to treat epilepsy and
now it's being studied for
its efficacy in improving memory and
alzheimer's disease patients and things
like that uh but
i'm not a pro i'm not very big on the on
lots of added oil in the diet which i
think you know once people started
becoming becoming interested in high fat
diets you know now suddenly the pendulum
swang in the other direction where
people will that you were all about
olive oil i am so
to a point i think it's important to
integrate olive oil into your diet i'll
use you know a liter a week i use it
fairly liberally but when it comes to
like throwing coconut oil in my smoothie
or
butter in my coffee i do occasionally
enjoy butter in my coffee i like the
taste but um
but you know i think it's important to
remember and we've been saying this in
the fitness community as i'm sure you
know for for years don't drink your
calories you don't want to do the same
you want to basically adhere the same
adhere to the same advice when it comes
to oil too because oil is not a very
nutrient-dense food it's very
calorie-dense it's not nutrient-dense
but i don't make any restrictions on the
fats naturally contained contained in
whole foods so nuts seeds grass-fed beef
dark meat chicken things like that do
you eat
uh well
i'm actually i mean people will debate
about phytic acid and things like that
but what do you eat well i like almonds
almonds are a great source of magnesium
vitamin e i like them raw okay i'm not
too concerned with the with the you know
phytate in almond skins or
you know anything like that i'll try to
soak them you know when i have the
opportunity but often
you soak them if you soak them
they're gross
they become gross what do you do with
them
you dry them
cause like my wife when she went through
the whole microbiome disaster the doctor
was like hey try soaking the almonds
inside it was [__] gross she was like
i'd rather not eat them they can get
slimy the last time i did it which was a
few weeks ago i soaked them and then i
tossed them in olive oil and then a
little bit of sea salt and i roast and i
roasted they were still wet
they actually came out really good
um if you if you just soak them they can
become i think a bit slimy but you soak
them and then get rid of the slime by
just putting olive oil on them i don't
understand i keep waiting for some
drying process yeah
no drying have you ever had sprouted
nuts
maybe that's
well i think
maybe that's what i did i was sprouted
nuts i'm almost certain go through a
drying process at least when you eat
them they're dry as [__] so you soak
them in a jar and then you pour out the
liquid and then they they dry during the
last for how long
i think i did it for three days okay
maybe we just [__] did it wrong but
they were gnarly now sprouted nuts which
i think they sprout by soaking uh but
it's
by the time they are packaged they're
dry and delicious and this is one of
those where i would not have believed so
if you take
pecans that have been just they do every
bad thing to them you can imagine they
put all the wonderful delicious and
deadly oils on it which tastes [__]
awesome i actually like the sprouted
pecans better so it's one of the few
times where the thing that i like better
is actually better for me
but i get down with sprouter nuts so
what else you've got almonds that you
soak uh
yeah although
i'll often if i'm if i'm traveling and i
buy you know i'll occasionally buy a bag
of raw almonds so i'll eat them like
that uh i'll use slivered almonds as a
condiment sometimes i'll throw them into
a salad um but i get a lot of fat from i
ate a lot of red meat i ate a lot of
fatty fish ate a lot of dark meat
chicken so wait a second i want to go
back to the nuts you only eat almonds so
when you say nuts you mean almonds
macadamia nuts are great because they're
very high in monounsaturated fat uh i've
been eating a lot of brazil nuts uh
lately for the selenium i can't deal
with those i love those actually i used
to not what does selenium help with
selenium is an important antioxidant in
the brain
it's
crucially important and it's also
crucially important for thyroid health
so it actually helps can't you eat too
many brazil nuts yeah i heard that
somewhere yeah so how many are you
eating a day uh three to four you want
to be kind of conscious of of your you
know selenium intake it's similar to
vitamin a you don't want to like over
consume
retinol which is you know the active
form of vitamin a super weird vitamin a
story is it true that polar bear liver
yeah has some like obscene amount it'll
kill you vitamin a okay that's what i
heard like there was some crazy story
about these
guys trapped in a cabin in like
antarctica do you hear about this
[__] polar bears are evil man wow
straight evil have you they're like the
fact that they're on coca-cola as like
the sweet cuddly thing those
[__] are wildly intelligent and
they will [__] you up doesn't surprise
me and so there's this whole story about
these guys trapped and the [__] polar
bears would trick them and they oh god
what'd they do they would have like one
standing out front and then the other
one would actually attack through the
back door i don't remember the story
well but the punch line is they finally
[__] kill these things they're so
like
raged out about how they've been picking
them off one by one they eat the [__]
and they but then one of them like dies
or something from eating the liver
because there was toxicity vitamin a
vitamin a toxicity yeah it's uh it's
super concentrated in bare liver
it's so weird that's so random so random
but well i mean it's not that unusual
because actually that's one of the
reasons why liver from beef or chicken
why don't other animals have that same
level of toxicity
well it uh i don't know i don't know i
don't know exactly what my hypothesis
would be that bears are going to store a
lot more stuff in the liver which is a
storage organ because they hibernate
so maybe they're storing vitamin a and
all i mean you store vitamin b12 in your
liver you store all kinds of things it's
a it's a storage organ for
you know choline for different nutrients
i just read something and it may have
been in your book i just came across it
but forgive me if it wasn't in your book
talking about
bears and they have some specific
reaction because of their need to
hibernate they don't have the muscle
wasting they store something in their
fat no it wasn't anybody
i don't remember the exact factoids it
was pretty interesting about something
that bears um oh god
this is a waste because i can't finish
this off but it was something the
mechanism by which bears spare their
muscle there was something for us to
interact in terms of amino acids i mean
growth hormone is pretty probably pretty
conserved throughout the animal kingdom
or at least
among mammals and growth hormone
one of the things that that helps to do
is to preserve lean mass during a fasted
state it's one of the reasons why growth
hormone becomes pretty sharply elevated
when fasting
um
fasting is [__] interesting you go
pretty deep on that in the book yeah he
went into that if i remember right in
the timing section
in the timing section yeah because i
have a section where i talk about our
relationship with time and light but
also food so light is the primary time
setter that our brains use to you know
to to get a sense of what time of day it
is which is important for the you know
operation of pretty much every system in
the body
you talk about there being ancillary
clocks which i thought was really
interesting so it's not just the light
it's it's also food yeah it's also food
food is a time center because we have
peripheral clocks
the master clock
in the brain is called the
suprachiasmatic nucleus and it's housed
in the hypothalamus which is a very
primordial
region of the brain and within that
structure which controls everything from
hunger to our drive for sex
it's at the base of the brain
essentially which is where you'll find
things that govern you know aspects of
our behavior that are important for
survival is it in is it in the
hypothalamus it's actually wrapped
inside of it yeah it's a little
chocolate chip sized
uh region
um in that area and it interfaces
directly with our eyes
with proteins interesting in our eyes
called melanopsin proteins which are
light sensing but they're not involved
in vision
and that's pretty much our body's master
clock setting apparatus so when we
perceive light at an intensity of about
a thousand lux or higher
that sets off the 24-hour rhythm that
guides essentially you know the run of
show for
uh
you know every system in the body um
i had the the privilege of interviewing
uh dr sachin panda who's a luminary in
this field over at the salk institute
for biological aging and he was part of
the team that um
that discovered the melanopsin protein
it's very interesting because
uh there's only a few of the you know of
of these proteins in the eye in the
retina and they are really there to kind
of interface with that with that master
clock system
um and i think that's just another area
of our biology where
uh modern life really you know seem
tends to do a disservice to us thrusting
us all into a perpetual state of jet lag
that's an interesting way to say it what
time do you eat your last meal
i try to eat my last meal about two to
three hours before bed i think you're
making a mistake why would you what's
your so i have a hypothesis you this is
one of those things that are you saying
i should be eating way earlier oh yes
yeah so i eat my last meal at 2 p.m i'm
done chewing at 2 p.m
so this all started i could um eat and
go to bed literally within seconds and
have no digestive problems whatsoever
my wife used to say i really think i
need time between my last meal and when
i go to bed and i was like that doesn't
make any sense and she was like no i
really feel like that sometimes because
she
four years ago just got debilitated
with digestive problems and it was crazy
it was emergency rooms it was like what
the [__] is happening it was
malnutrition are you gonna die like i
was really scared so we start looking at
every [__] aspect and she has this
guess like oh i think that and people
weren't talking about this yet at least
not like the way that it's being talked
about now where you you can't avoid
hearing about this um you haven't
written your [__] book yet so let's
start with that for letting her suffer
now i'm kidding um so
she starts talking about like hey i
think timing really matters it didn't
make sense to me and she starts doing it
and making me stay up for three hours
because i'm not gonna go to bed and
leave her hanging so like if we're on
vacation or something she would say hey
you know is there any way like if
because she likes to eat actually quite
late is there any way that we can stay
up like if we eat at nine we step till
midnight yeah of course maybe i'll we'll
do it and she was like i really think
it's helping
and so it just naturally put me on that
same rhythm
and i thought huh that's interesting
like
now even when i go like hardcore i don't
get an upset stomach so like at
christmas time i go off the rails i'm
having a lot of ice cream all that and i
wasn't sure is it the intermittent
fasting because if i'm eating bad and i
make sure that i fast for at least 16
hours i'm golden i can get away with
murder and so i thought is it the
length of fast or is it the number of
hours because i find it much easier just
if i'm going to clock because i
when i'm really in it i try to do 20
hour fast daily
and
that i feel i can stay lean easily
it gets a little hard the last hour or
two admittedly is like i have to like
focus and alter my lifestyle so i'm not
trying to do something really
cognitively demanding for the last two
hours but like i find that's a that's a
good rhythm for me 19 to 20 hours and so
i started wondering though like i
definitely feel better i can get away
with more um but is it the length of
fast is it the number of hours because
if i'm going to go that long i find it
easier to just eat my last meal late
rather than trying to wake up and go six
hours or seven hours without eating um
and because i wake up so [__] early
like i'm usually awake between three and
four am so with no alarm it's just when
i wake up i go to bed at night i wake up
and so this christmas when i went off
the rails again but this time i said
okay i'm not going to worry so much
about length of fast but i'm really
going to be hyper conscious about
clocking five hours before i go to bed
dude cash money felt [__] amazing
yeah so i really want my wife like if i
feel a benefit and i'm somebody that's
got a pretty robust digestion i want my
wife to try five hours i actually think
most people think they're being just a
[__] rock star at three
i have a god instinct that you're
actually better like four and five hours
before bed well i think you're probably
right i think that the ideal time to
stop eating would probably be around
seven p.m i mean it depends on the time
is that ideal is that a sunset thing or
yeah yeah because well
you know i think we're diurnal creatures
right we're diurnal we're meant to you
know eat and do most of the things that
we're going to do that are going to
require the greatest energy expenditure
during the day
um
and you know we know that as
night approaches and the sun begins to
set and melatonin levels start to creep
up and cortisol levels start to drop
that uh
daylight associated activity sort of is
you know becomes less supported in the
body
and that includes digestion and
metabolism and that's one of the reasons
why we become less insulin sensitive
sensitive later in the day but also
digestion um falters to some degree i
mean peristalsis slows which is the
transit of you know
uh
food components through the through the
gi tract so i think
it's probably
you're probably better off stopping
eating by
like six to seven pm and in fact the few
but the the growing body of research in
humans that's being done with early time
restricted feeding also seems to back
this up that when we eat you know
earlier dinners it seems to be the to
the benefit of our metabolic health
independent of weight loss now for
somebody like you who's eating
only within a four-hour window it's
almost impossible i think within those
four hours to over consume calories so i
mean you're my friend come over i'll
show you how really do you not know
about slippery foods homie i'm
interested well what are you eating
whole healthy processes the the reality
is i in my four hour window i don't
overeat and because if i overeat then i
can still put on fat for sure in a four
hour window no problem i could i could
if i wasn't cognizant of
um
what i'm eating i could easily clock and
i'm talking every single day of my life
i could easily clock
in that four hour window
four thousand five thousand calories
that'd be pretty easy i'd have to have
ice cream there's no question so this
was uh
the term slippery foods comes from the
gastric bypass community or lap band
community where they have a smaller
amount of space
so they get tricky like the ones who
sort of give up on staying on the
straight and arrow
realize that if you eat things like ice
cream that's like really sort of liquidy
that you can pack a lot of [__]
calories well that makes sense because
ice cream is an ultra processed foods
and ultra processed foods are defined in
part because of the fact that they are
so calorie dense and it's one of the
reasons why we see the obesity epidemic
that we're now seeing because these
foods you know essentially short-circuit
our brain satiety checkpoints so if
you're trying if you're
trying to eat for example the genius
foods you know super nutrient-dense
foods within that four-hour window which
we know are the foods that are gonna be
the best for you um you know which
unfortunately doesn't include ice cream
uh in that under that umbrella
i think it's probably gonna be pretty
difficult to overconsume calories so i
mean that is a good way of of basically
uh drawing a line in the sand and and
maintaining some level of of calorie
control and probably what you're seeing
are some of the benefits of calorie
restriction which we know are numerous
you know you can you it's a great way to
reduce inflammation in smaller organisms
it's one of the few ways of extending
life
um in a rat or a mouse
well they've done that the caloric
restriction they've done across like
dozens of species right like ring worms
and yeast and fruit flies and things
like that yeah it seems to be pretty
you're not going to be able to kind of
prove that in a human i don't think but
yeah calorie restriction
you won't be able to prove the longevity
because people won't comply and because
it's such because people live for a long
time but i mean the it seems that the
that
you know if humans are anything like
other mammals or smaller organisms or or
you know i mean because it seems to be a
very consistent uh thing in the
literature that that calorie restriction
is you know one of the few ways to
extend the lifespan of a of an organism
um so you're probably getting some of
those benefits what back when i first
started doing and you know science is
continually evolving but when i started
doing the research on on fasting i was
less convinced that the feeding window
really mattered but the more the
research comes out the more research
comes you know comes out i've sort of
refined my thinking a bit on it and i do
think that it is probably wiser to begin
your feeding sort of earlier in the day
um and to stop eating earlier in the day
as well because we're these diurnal
creatures and the day is when our
insulin sensitivity is most primed and
when you know our metabolisms are most
primed to
you know burn off ingested energy store
ingested energy and digest food
in a way that's that's as efficient as
it's going to be
yeah my thing with that is
this is not you know the thing that you
can turn into a scientific paper but
just going by experience so
originally i was like oh i'll skip
breakfast you know i can stay busy i'll
go work out work out fasted all of that
like that'll let me sort of draw this
out but i found myself naturally wanting
to eat pretty soon after a workout like
just the impulse was there now i can
override the impulse like i said the
change or die mechanism of setting a
line in my life and being disciplined
about it i'm very good at that
but i did find myself distracted by
hunger if i tried to push you know six
eight hours after i woke up before i had
my first meal so i thought
like
would i actually be better off front
loading my calories and then seeing how
i do
because
because my calories were still clocking
in i say 1800 or 2 000 calories a day
i would start getting hungry right
around bedtime but i wouldn't have any
trouble falling asleep i wouldn't have
any trouble staying asleep and then when
i woke up my hunger had reset so i
didn't wake up hungry like i went to bed
hungry so i would essentially have sleep
for dinner so i thought let me try it
and see how i do and
it worked [__] awesome and so that
was when i went from like struggling to
make 16 hours to i could push and i
could do 18 pretty easily and with some
effort i could get up to 20. and so i
probably averaged
19.5 hours a day fasting for
[Music]
90 days or something like that like i i
found that relatively easy 18 i can do
as a no-brainer um but it's much easier
for me to have my last meal done chewing
by two in bed by nine up by three four
first meal around eight
nine
yeah that rhythm works for me
yeah i think you're also at an advantage
in that scenario because you're going to
bed at nine i go to bed at like midnight
or 12 30. i go to i go to bed a bit
later
wouldn't the timing sleep guy say that
that's a bit too late
you know it's probably not ideal um is
that your natural rhythm though because
what do you believe in chronotypes is
that a thing for you
no i'm not i'm i don't really uh i'm i'm
not familiar with any potential research
there but um
but all the sleep authorities i think
seem to advocate for eight hours of
sleep you know seven and a half to eight
hours of sleep what do you get if you
don't have that that's what i do you get
that seven
yeah so even though i go to bed late i
get generally you know seven and a half
to eight hours of sleep if not more
every night i'm a very good sleeper
um and i orient my life in a way that
you know my sleep is sacred so my room
is very dark i keep it cool
um
how cool do you keep it i keep it around
65 degrees do you not wake up cold or do
you just blank it up i feel like i'm not
i feel like i'm suffocating unless i'm
breathing in cool air i hear that yeah
but 68 for me is the max i start going
below that and i just wake up in the
middle of the night i can't [__]
sleep because i'm so cold so cold i mean
i use a warm blanket and i sleep with a
uh a pillow on top of my head
that's interesting so i sleep with the
blankets over my head entirely i i have
since i was a little kid people always
like girlfriends and obviously now my
wife look at me like what the [__] are
you doing how do you breathe
i love it
sometimes i will put the blanket over my
eyes because i want that cool air in my
mouth yeah but for the most part it's
just [__] under the sheets so it
i definitely blank it up and i love that
i'm under the covers but at
south of 68
that cold seeps in and so do you still
get the benefits of the cool air because
i could do more blankets obviously but
am i getting any benefit at that point
because i'm not actually
cool yeah um
that's an interesting question i don't
think that you're
i think that it's really you know being
cool
as you're winding down you know because
your body temperature begins to to lower
uh right before bed
um
so i don't think that you have to
i'm actually i'm not sure i mean i know
a lot of people that are now using these
cooling mattresses or these cooling
covers
um and they're reporting you know
anecdotally you know improvements in
their sleep you know for that but uh
yeah i don't think that your body
necessarily has to be the temperature of
the room but i do think generally just
being in a cooler environment there have
also been some really interesting
studies um
and i and i cite a few of them in the
book where uh people that
sleep in these sort of cooler
environments overnight they tend to see
a greater proliferation of brown fat
brown adipose tissue which is very
healthy metabolically active and
in those studies they were not sleeping
without covers they were not sleeping
exposed to the air they were just
sleeping in a cooler room did you hear
about that chick that swam the bearing
straight i did not i really need to look
her up because i brought this story up
several times i can never remember her
name but to do that she had to
transition her adipose tissue into brown
fat and she was living in alaska if i'm
not mistaken and she she took
exclusively cold showers think about how
cold the water would be in alaska yeah
and then slept through the winter with
the [__] window open and no blankets
that seems like
you're just gonna get hypothermia and
die but she was able to swim the [__]
bearing straight that's the space
between alaska and russia
it's pretty nice crazy that's cold water
i do i do regular
cold water immersion and so i will
attest that you do acclimate it does get
easier as you start to cultivate walk me
through your uh your strategy what do
you do oh man well i'm a so as i
mentioned you know the three ps of of
detoxification and perspiring so sauna
is a huge aspect we're going to get to
that in a minute because
you talked about that in your book i've
i've gone deep on cold stuff but not the
heat so i want to go full blown on that
in a minute but what's your cold setup
uh so i go into i you know have the the
i'm fortunate enough to be able to go to
uh gyms and spas that have um cold you
know cold pools cold pledges what are
they at 55. they're at 50. 48 to 50.
48 is that'll get your attention yeah
and very recently i had the opportunity
to do 42 which was which was that's got
to hurt like at that point it's not just
cold it's actually painful i think it's
but it's very much a mind over matter
thing because even even i was able to do
four minutes under 42 degrees and i feel
like once you're able to do your neck
yeah up to my neck you really want to
make sure that your chin yeah for those
uh not watching at home that that wasn't
just neck yeah it's like basically up to
here okay yeah up to the up to the chin
48 degrees you accumulate brown fat it's
not everywhere that you find brown fat
it's around the collar bone it's in the
back of the neck it's along the spine
under the armpits so if you're just
going up to waist depth in this in you
know do in in your in the pond or
whatever it is that you're that you're
using for your cold water immersion i
don't think that you're getting the full
uh range of benefits so yeah so i'll
sync myself you know i'll do four to
five minutes i do it until i basically
can't do it anymore and the level of
mental acuity that i feel afterwards is
just like almost pharmacological in
terms of it's like you know how how
powerful it is it's amazing how long
does it last for you
that acuity uh
it i mean it lasts for a while and i
would contrast it to
so if i were to do
sauna
i feel really good after asana but i do
feel kind of lethargic yes you know and
that can persist for through the rest of
the night pretty much
that's my next question so now i want to
know your whole heat routine and well so
let's wrap up the cold so you do the
cold it's immersion it's up to your chin
it's as long as you can take it it's
roughly 48 to 50 48 to 50 degrees yeah
and we do that how often i do that three
to four days a week i don't do it after
um exercise directly after exercise
there seems to be a growing body of
literature that's suggesting that it's
actually sort of counter to the anabolic
stimulus the inflammation yeah you want
a little bit of the inflammation but i
actually do it then before late at night
i'll do it hours later or on days where
i'm not doing like resistance training
but i actually have i have like low back
issues and so for me countering that
inflammation
yeah how did you get low back issues
from uh
from like a just being stupid and not
warming up uh under the squat rack a
couple years from squats yeah i thought
you were going to say deadlift for sure
no and this is persisted it's persisted
yeah it's it's getting it's way better
though thanks to like all these
different modalities eating an
anti-inflammatory diet in general uh you
know exercising as much as i can staying
active i mean ironically staying active
which you know people with back pain are
going to be like oh you know it's like
it's grown interesting but it's the best
thing that you can do the only time my
low back ever hurts is when i stop dead
lifting yeah well i mean you can dead
lift heavy and really [__] yourself up
so super careful but
um
mid-range stuff that i can do 12 reps of
that kind of thing if i'm doing that
consistently i'm fine never have back
pain when i stop then i get trouble yeah
yeah staying active is crucially
important but and you know cold
immersion is a great modality for pain
relief it's it's just amazing um it's
good for mental acuity it's good for i i
find that it's
it powerfully improves my mood if i'm
anxious or i'm feeling depressed um i
mean and i'm not the only person to talk
about this like wim hoff you know he's
talked about the mood boosting effects
of cold immersion but
but for me i think it's it's super
powerful and the metabolic benefits i
think are among the most interesting and
most important aspects of cold immersion
so whether it's just ambient room
temperature or doing regular cold
immersion um they're showing that just
modulating the ambient temperature of
your environment can boost uh glucose or
you know glucose tolerance insulin
sensitivity in the body can help you
know boost your metabolic rate and
things like that so for anybody
struggling with slow metabolism or
insulin sensitivity issues um i think
that this is a really underappreciated
modality that can help potentially boost
your health yeah and and you really go
into it in the book um
this is one of my favorite sections so
now take me into the heat so this is one
of those it's been on my radar but
because it's not
and maybe i just haven't done it because
i've never done a sauna and maybe that's
the you've never done a song no never
and i have one in my house damn um so
i'm gonna try it like after reading the
book i was like i legitimately can't
believe
yeah so anyway i need to do it it's
[__] ridiculous so the reason i
haven't done it though is because warm
is deeply comforting to me so the cold
sucks cold hurts i don't want to do it
therefore i do do it i don't have any
fears around heat um so it's like it
just seemed too easy it seemed too easy
to be beneficial so i've just never done
the research so reading your book i was
like [__] like there's actually a lot
going on like i'll say that you sold the
heat exposure even better than you sold
the cold exposure so like the you put
the um the list down of like people that
do like two to
four two to three hours a day like a
week excuse me versus like the reduction
in um alzheimer's or heart disease in in
in stroke crazy disease dementia
yeah i mean a lot of this research is
coming out of the university of eastern
finland which is an amazing place to
have this research being done because
finland is the sonic capital of the
world and they do dry sauna right so no
steam
so actually dry and wet sauna are
different from steam rooms a steam room
is a steam room and then you have dry
and wet sauna a dry sauna basically just
means that you can't throw water on the
rocks and a wet sauna is
you know what's the difference in terms
of its impact
uh i think it's just a uh com like a a
preference personal presence okay so
from a study perspective because you
specifically call out in the book that
it was a dry sauna so i was like oh [__]
i won't do the water thing well that i
believe is where is what they sort of
looked at in the research
in finland it's the most common i guess
sauna modality
although it's a combination of dry and
wet but i think in the u.s most people
think about wet sauna as steam and in
fact that's what i thought uh i thought
a steam room was a wet sauna so today
yeah to be honest but it's actually it's
actually not so i think i i think i
refer to saunas in general as being dry
saunas because
um most people in the u.s sauna is not
as common most people have at least in
the gyms that i have access to all
that's available to me are steam rooms
and they have different impacts or it's
just not studied yet not studied yet so
probably similar impact i personally
like to my personal preference is well
the research is on the side of the
of the sauna um it's coming out of
finland people in finland are using dry
dry saunas uh for the most part they're
not using steam rooms and so if you want
sort of the research on your side
you know you've got to do the dry so
walk me through the benefits because
they were legion yeah they're legion i
mean on the for one
using a sauna acts like an exercise
memetic and what temperature are we
talking about here about 200 degrees you
know 175 to 205 degrees it's like it's
like the rain 205. yeah
it's great it's like a russian bunya
it's like amazing not for very long it's
going to say like uh so you're not a
doctor blah blah consult your physician
yes but um
uh give me ballpark temperature cause
i'm gonna do whatever you tell me to do
yeah i mean i was in a sauna last night
and it was about 203 jesus degrees yeah
it was very hot it was a russian
i don't know what that means it's like
classic old russian old school like
very hot pretty much okay so 203-ish
degrees and you sit there for how long
um i mean it's like an oven dude i know
it's an oven it's my if it's my first
go-around i'll be able to stay in for
you know 15 20 okay 25 minutes so it's
not you know an extreme amount of time
but
as you do a couple of rounds your
tolerance sort of diminishes and that's
when you know you've diminishes your
tolerance
[Music]
yeah if you're i think over the macro
your tolerance does increase you
acclimate and that's been i think shown
in the literature as well
um but in the micro it's just like
exercise i mean like you're you're not
as strong on your last set as you are on
your first set and sorry you were saying
that it's an exercise mimetic so it
mimics some of the effects of exercise
of aerobic exercise like mild to
moderate aerobic exercise you can feel
this if you sit in a sauna you put your
finger over the radial artery in your
wrist and you'll notice it starts to
beat you know like if you look at your
heart rate it's similar to what it would
be if you were jogging on a treadmill
really yeah and in fact i've been in a
done this is ridiculous it's amazing
it's truly i think medicinal and
there's even been moments in the sauna
where you know one of the uh indicators
of high-intensity exercise that's
reaching like a lactic threshold is you
fail the talk test you're no longer able
to talk while you're exercising
right i thought you were saying in the
sauna i was like jesus
it can i mean i've been in the sauna
where it's been so hot or i've actually
had to get out because it's like it's so
hot i can't even like talk anymore so
but that's the point of which you want
to like exit this pass out in these
[__] things i've never seen it
you don't want to pass out yeah
exactly
um but you do want to bring your body to
a point of discomfort because this is a
another 205 degrees you're going to be
deeply uncomfortable arizona is
uncomfortable so there you go
jesus it's hot now i'm scared that's
good that makes me want to do it more
it's hot but you schvitz you sweat
and sweating you know so aside from the
fact that it kind of gives your so you
get like a cardio workout and it boosts
blood flow it increases nitric oxide so
i mean if you've ever had just to sort
of um
paint a picture if you've ever had a
an injured joint or a swollen ankle and
you put a hot compress on it it brings
blood to the surface right it gets
really warm and red and it promotes
healing because it boosts nitric oxide
and it you know brings nutrients uh to
the area of injury the same thing
happens on a full body scale when you
sit in a sauna because you're
essentially applying a hot compress to
the entirety of your body
so it's amazingly healing and um
and that's one of the reasons i think
why it's been associated with such
dramatic risk reductions for stroke for
heart disease
um [__] at night the morning midday
where am i well heat actually raising my
heart rate so it makes me worry about
doing it too close to bedtime
you probably don't want to do it too
close to bedtime because yeah for that
reason because it can be an exercise
memetic exercise acts like a time setter
as well you don't want to do it too
close to bedtime
in fact i would say
if there is an optimal time to do sauna
you probably want to do it
post-workout because actually heat seems
to potentiate
uh the you know the anabolic effects of
exercise exercise adaptation and the
like um but i'll do it you know when i
do it i tend to do because i'm i'm i go
to a place that has a hot and cold i do
what's called contrast therapy so i'll
sit in the sauna for 25 minutes and then
i'll go cool off in the cold and then
i'll go back and forth
and so
is there is there research on that
because i worry that that's a bit like
doing the cold after the exercise where
if you're gonna do the hot do the
[__] hot and if you're gonna do the
cold do the cold yeah and that mixing
the two sounds like and i'm wildly
ignorant on this so i could be totally
wrong but intuitively
that feels
wrong yeah like one would negate yeah
they're going to like you're sort of on
the path of one your heat shock proteins
are kicking off and then you go cool
down yeah
i'm not actually aware of any research
that would like
show that that would be a negative thing
if anything i would think because it's
this accumulation of stress if you're
doing it on a day where you haven't gone
to the gym for example i think probably
the net is positive
um but i couldn't tell you contrast
therapy i haven't seen any direct
research on on contrast therapy but it
is a modality that's been used
traditionally you hear people talk about
it all right yeah i mean they do it in
finland you know and that's where
they're where you know they're seeing
all these benefits they come back in
yeah in fact i had the i had the ability
i had the privilege of getting to do it
and filmed recently it was so much fun
um
and then i think you know it's pretty
clear that perspiring you release you
know all kinds of heavy metals certain
heavy metals cadmium i'm told cadmium um
bpa phthalates you sweat out bpa yeah
that's interesting you can easily find
um if you go to pubmed and search for
blood sweat urine studies
uh you can look at a lot of this stuff
like the data is out there you can you
know
find what we are excreting through our
um through our sweat what seems to be
excreted you know in higher
concentration in urine
um and the like so
it's uh it's out there for people to see
but it's a major
you know i think it's super interesting
and the fact that this research is being
done in finland i think is very telling
because
if you were to do a study you know an
observational study on the population of
sauna goers in the u.s there's probably
a very strong healthy user bias you know
people who are using saunas are probably
you know people who have it in their
homes so they're affluent or they have
access to fancy gym memberships or
they're spending a lot of time in the
spa taking care of themselves
but in finland you know finland saunas
are as common as showers there's on
average one sauna for every household in
finland so it's just a super commonplace
ritual that's just embedded in the
culture so
that's where i think this research uh
you know where there's a lot of sort of
credence to the notion that saunas can
be
beneficial to health because they just
do it it's you know it's such a it's so
ingrained in the culture there
um and whether or not you're health
conscious or not i mean i go to like a
traditional russian sauna in la and i'm
surrounded by people from all walks of
life when i go there and you know most
of them actually are not the picture of
health
and i would imagine that the same would
be true in finland so you get a really
nice picture of like what your average
person stands to gain when regularly
doing sauna at different uh you know
doses so to speak
dude super interesting the book is chock
full of interesting [__] like that thank
you so much for coming back and hanging
out it's a lot of fun thanks um where
can people get this bad boy yeah
anywhere books are sold amazon barnes
and noble check it out and come say hi
to me on instagram at max lugovir yes
indeed awesome man thank you for coming
out and everybody thank you for watching
and listening peace out thanks so much
because when it comes to nutrition what
i've found is that
the mainstream medical system has very
little to offer and nutrition really is
so important when it comes to
preventing you know all of the diseases
that i think we're seeing skyrocket
today